<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Errors, rate limiting &amp; observability — interview questions</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="kicker">Interview Bank 9 · Production</p>
<h1>Errors, rate limiting &amp; observability — interview questions</h1>
<p class="meta">Core / Senior / Staff · answer from memory first</p>

<div class="box"><span class="label">How to use</span> Answer from memory FIRST, then check below.</div>

<h2>Error contract: Problem Details</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">01</span> What is the current standard for HTTP API error bodies?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>RFC 9457, "Problem Details for HTTP APIs"</strong> — media type <code>application/problem+json</code>. It defines a single, consistent shape for error responses across an API. Naming the RFC number (not just "problem+json") is the senior tell; it <strong>supersedes RFC 7807</strong>, so cite the right one in the room.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">02</span> What are the standard fields of a Problem Details object?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>type</code> (a URI identifying the problem type), <code>title</code> (short human summary), <code>status</code> (the HTTP status code), <code>detail</code> (human explanation of this occurrence), and <code>instance</code> (a URI for this specific occurrence). Plus free <strong>extension members</strong> for anything else you need to convey.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">03</span> Why is one consistent error contract across the whole API a senior concern?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Inconsistent errors are the fastest way to make an API "impossible to integrate against" — a bare <code>500</code> here, a <code>200</code> with <code>{"ok":false}</code> there, a different JSON shape per endpoint. A client can only write robust error handling once, against <em>one</em> shape. One contract everywhere is the move that separates "shipped the happy path" from "operated this in production."</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">04</span> Problem Details gives you a shape — what's still missing for clients?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>A <strong>stable machine-readable error code</strong> (e.g. <code>"code":"card_declined"</code>) clients can branch on. The RFC's <code>title</code>/<code>detail</code> are human prose you'll reword next sprint; clients must not parse them. Add the code as an extension member, pair it with a human message for logs/developers, and emit <strong>field-level errors</strong> for validation so a client knows <em>which</em> field failed and why.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">05</span> Why must clients branch on error codes, not error prose?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Prose is for humans and changes freely; codes are part of your contract and must stay stable. The moment you reword a string and a partner's <code>if</code>-statement breaks, you've taught them to never trust your contract again. So: <strong>stable codes, human prose</strong> — and document the codes as an error catalog they can code against.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">06</span> Why should you never put stack traces or SQL in an error response?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Two reasons. <strong>Security</strong>: stack traces, internal IDs, SQL fragments, and "which layer failed" hints are reconnaissance gifts to an attacker (this is the leakage side of OWASP API security). <strong>Maintenance</strong>: they leak implementation detail clients will accidentally couple to. Return a stable code and a safe human message; log the internals server-side, keyed by a request id.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">07</span> A team returns <code>200 OK</code> with <code>{"success":false}</code> for errors. What's wrong?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Don't tunnel errors through 200.</strong> The status line is part of the contract and every intermediary reads it: caches will cache the "success," load balancers and clients treat it as healthy, retries/alerting/dashboards all misfire. It also forces every client to ignore HTTP and parse the body to learn it failed. Use the real status code and a <code>problem+json</code> body.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">08</span> How do you roll out a consistent error contract across an existing API with many teams?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Make it the path of least resistance, not a memo. Provide a <strong>shared error middleware/library</strong> that emits <code>problem+json</code> by default and maps exceptions to status + code; publish an <strong>error catalog</strong> (every code, meaning, status); enforce in CI with contract tests / a linter on the OpenAPI spec. Migrate incrementally behind the existing surface, version where the shape genuinely changes, and treat code stability as a backward-compatibility guarantee.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Status code mapping</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">09</span> <code>400</code> vs <code>422</code> — when each?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>400 Bad Request</code> for a <strong>syntactically malformed</strong> request — broken JSON, missing required structure, can't even parse it. <code>422 Unprocessable Content</code> for a request that <strong>parsed fine but is semantically invalid</strong> — e.g. valid JSON whose <code>email</code> field fails validation. Parsed-but-wrong is the <code>422</code> signal.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">10</span> <code>401</code> vs <code>403</code> — what's the distinction?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>401 Unauthorized</code> = <em>authentication</em> failed — missing or invalid credentials; we don't know who you are. <code>403 Forbidden</code> = <em>authorization</em> failed — we know who you are, you just may not do this. Two questions (who are you / what may you do), two codes. (Yes, <code>401</code>'s name says "unauthorized" but it's really about authentication.)</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">11</span> <code>404</code> vs <code>409</code> — when do you reach for each?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>404 Not Found</code>: the target resource doesn't exist (or you're deliberately hiding its existence). <code>409 Conflict</code>: the resource exists but the request conflicts with its <strong>current state</strong> — e.g. creating a duplicate, editing a stale version (lost-update), or an operation illegal in the current state. <code>404</code> is "no such thing"; <code>409</code> is "the thing is here but this clashes with where it is."</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">12</span> When is returning <code>404</code> instead of <code>403</code> the right call?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>When even <em>revealing that a resource exists</em> leaks information — e.g. another tenant's object you're not allowed to see. A <code>403</code> confirms "it exists, you just can't touch it," which is an enumeration aid. Returning <code>404</code> ("as far as you're concerned, it isn't there") avoids that side channel. The trade-off: it can confuse legitimate clients, so it's a deliberate security choice, not a default.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">13</span> Why does consistent status mapping matter beyond aesthetics?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Because the whole HTTP ecosystem acts on the status: caches, retry logic, circuit breakers, monitoring, and clients all decide behavior from it. Map a transient overload to <code>400</code> and clients won't retry; map a validation error to <code>500</code> and you page yourself for client mistakes and inflate your error budget. The status class (4xx = "you," 5xx = "me") drives <em>who retries</em> and <em>who gets paged</em>.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">14</span> A partner's 4xx errors are spiking your 5xx dashboards. What's likely wrong and how do you fix it?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Almost certainly <strong>miscategorized status codes</strong>: client mistakes (bad input, auth, conflicts) are being surfaced as <code>5xx</code>, so they burn your <em>server</em> error budget and trigger pages for problems you can't fix. Audit the exception-to-status mapping: validation/auth/conflict → the right <code>4xx</code>; reserve <code>5xx</code> for genuine server faults. Then split SLO dashboards by status class so client-driven <code>4xx</code> doesn't pollute server-reliability signals.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Rate limiting</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">15</span> Why rate-limit an API at all?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Without limits, one client — a buggy retry loop, a scraper, or an attacker — can exhaust your capacity or run up your cloud bill, degrading the service for everyone. This is OWASP <strong>API4:2023 Unrestricted Resource Consumption</strong>. Rate limiting protects <strong>availability and cost</strong>.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">16</span> What's the HTTP contract for a throttled request?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>429 Too Many Requests</code> with a <code>Retry-After</code> header telling the client when to come back. Ideally also expose <code>RateLimit-Limit</code> / <code>RateLimit-Remaining</code> / <code>RateLimit-Reset</code> on <em>every</em> response so well-behaved clients self-throttle <em>before</em> they hit the wall.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">17</span> Name the four common rate-limiting algorithms.</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Fixed window</strong>, <strong>sliding window</strong>, <strong>token bucket</strong>, and <strong>leaky bucket</strong>. Be ready to give one trade-off for each, not just the names.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">18</span> Fixed window — how it works and its flaw?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Count requests per calendar window (e.g. per minute), reset at the boundary. Trivial to implement and cheap on state. The flaw is the <strong>boundary burst</strong>: a client can fire a full limit at the end of one window and another full limit at the start of the next, getting <strong>2× the limit</strong> in a short span straddling the edge.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">19</span> Sliding window — what does it buy you?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>A rolling time window (weighted counter or request log) instead of a fixed clock boundary. It <strong>smooths out the boundary burst</strong> — no edge double-spend — at modest extra state cost (you track more than a single counter). The middle ground between fixed window's simplicity and stricter shaping.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">20</span> Token bucket — how it works and why it's the common default?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Tokens refill at a steady rate; each request spends one; the bucket size caps how many can accumulate. It <strong>allows bursts up to the bucket size, then settles to the steady refill rate</strong>. It's the common choice because real traffic is spiky-but-bounded — token bucket tolerates a legitimate spike while still enforcing a sustained average.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">21</span> Leaky bucket — when would you pick it over token bucket?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Requests queue and drain at a <strong>fixed output rate</strong>, smoothing the <em>output</em> to a constant stream regardless of input spikes. Pick it when you're protecting a <strong>downstream that hates bursts</strong> (a fragile legacy system, a rate-limited third party). Token bucket lets bursts through; leaky bucket flattens them — at the cost of added latency/queueing.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">22</span> Per-principal vs per-IP limiting — what's your default?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Limit per <strong>principal</strong> — API key, account, or user — so one tenant can't starve the rest, and so limits track the entity you actually bill and trust. Fall back to <strong>per-IP</strong> only for unauthenticated traffic. Per-IP alone is leaky: many users behind one NAT/proxy share a limit, and a single attacker rotates IPs to dodge it.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">23</span> Why separate burst from sustained quotas?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>So a legitimate short spike isn't punished like genuine sustained abuse. You might allow <strong>100/sec burst but 10k/hour sustained</strong>: the burst limit absorbs a normal flurry, while the sustained limit caps long-run consumption. One number can't express both "spikes are fine" and "don't camp on my capacity all day."</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">24</span> How do you enforce a global rate limit across many distributed API nodes?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The naive per-node counter lets the real limit balloon by N nodes. Options, in tension: a <strong>shared store</strong> (Redis with atomic INCR/Lua, or a token-bucket script) gives an accurate global count but adds a hop and a dependency on every request; <strong>local counters with a per-node share</strong> are fast but approximate and unfair under skew; <strong>sampled/sync'd local buckets</strong> trade a little accuracy for latency. Most real systems do limiting at the <strong>gateway/edge</strong> with a shared store, accepting eventual-consistency slop near the boundary.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">25</span> Clients hammer you, all retry on <code>429</code> at once, and the spike repeats every reset. What's happening?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>A <strong>thundering herd / retry-storm synchronization</strong>: every throttled client wakes at the same <code>Retry-After</code>/reset instant and stampedes together. Fixes: tell clients to back off with <strong>exponential backoff plus jitter</strong> (and honor it server-side by varying <code>Retry-After</code>); use a <strong>sliding/token-bucket</strong> scheme so resets aren't a single cliff; and consider per-client reset offsets so windows don't all align.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Observability: the three pillars</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">26</span> What are the three pillars of observability?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Logs</strong>, <strong>metrics</strong>, and <strong>traces</strong>. Logs = discrete events (what happened); metrics = aggregated numeric trends (how much/how fast); traces = the path of one request across services. You need all three — each answers a different question.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">27</span> Why structured (JSON) logs over free-text logs?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Structured logs carry named fields (<code>request_id</code>, <code>status</code>, <code>latency_ms</code>, <code>user_id</code>) you can filter, aggregate, and join on at scale. Free-text means regex-scraping and grep at 3am. Structured logging is what makes logs queryable instead of just readable.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">28</span> What are the RED metrics?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>R</strong>ate (requests/sec), <strong>E</strong>rrors (failed requests), <strong>D</strong>uration (latency). Tracked per endpoint, they're the minimal dashboard that tells you whether a service is healthy — and the first thing to pull up when something's wrong.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">29</span> What is a correlation / request id and why does it matter?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>An id attached to a request and <strong>propagated across every service</strong> it touches — W3C <code>traceparent</code> or <code>X-Request-Id</code> — so one request is traceable end to end. It's the connective tissue between the three pillars. Without it, a distributed bug is a needle in N separate haystacks.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">30</span> Why report latency as p95/p99 instead of the mean?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Because the mean hides the tail. A p50 of 50ms can sit alongside a p99 of 4s — and that p99 is exactly the slow experience losing you the partner. Averages get dragged around by outliers and conceal them at once. Percentiles describe what real users actually feel; judge and alert on <strong>p95/p99</strong>, never the mean.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">31</span> What does distributed tracing give you that logs and metrics don't?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>It reconstructs <strong>one request's path across the whole call graph</strong> as a tree of timed spans, so you can see <em>where the time went</em> and which downstream call failed or was slow. Metrics tell you "p99 is up"; logs tell you "this line errored"; traces tell you "the request spent 3.8s waiting on the payments service." Wire it up with <strong>OpenTelemetry</strong> for a vendor-neutral standard.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">32</span> What is an SLO and an error budget?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>An <strong>SLO</strong> is a target on a measurable signal (e.g. "99.9% of requests succeed under 300ms p99 over 30 days"). The <strong>error budget</strong> is the allowed shortfall — the 0.1% you may fail. It turns "is this bad enough to page someone?" into a <em>number</em> instead of a vibe, and gives a shared rule: burn the budget fast → freeze risky changes; budget healthy → ship faster.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">33</span> Tracing every request is too expensive at scale. How do you sample without going blind?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Mix strategies. <strong>Head-based sampling</strong> (decide at ingress, e.g. keep 1%) is cheap but may drop the rare failure you needed. <strong>Tail-based sampling</strong> buffers spans and keeps traces that are <em>interesting</em> — errors, high latency — at the cost of more infrastructure. Keep <strong>100% of error/slow traces</strong> and sample the boring success path; keep full-fidelity <em>metrics</em> always so aggregates stay accurate even when individual traces are sampled out.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">34</span> "We have lots of dashboards but still can't answer new questions." What's the gap?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>That's <strong>monitoring, not observability</strong>. Dashboards answer pre-defined questions; observability is the ability to ask <em>new</em> ones about behavior you didn't anticipate — high-cardinality, explorable telemetry (rich structured events, traces you can slice by arbitrary attributes). The fix is investing in wide, high-cardinality events and trace-linked logs, not adding a 41st pre-built chart.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Resilience interplay</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">35</span> What problem do idempotency keys solve here?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Rate limits and outages <em>cause</em> client retries, and retries on writes (a non-idempotent <code>POST</code>) cause <strong>duplicates</strong> — double charges, double orders. An <strong>idempotency key</strong> on the request lets the server recognize a retry and return the original result instead of re-executing. Observability tells you it's falling over; idempotency keeps recovery from corrupting state.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">36</span> How does an idempotency key actually work server-side?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The client sends a unique key (e.g. <code>Idempotency-Key</code> header). The server stores key → result on first success; a later request with the same key <strong>returns the stored response without re-running the operation</strong>. You handle the in-flight case (concurrent retry while the first is still processing) with a lock/"in progress" record, and expire keys after a sensible window. This makes a non-idempotent <code>POST</code> safe to retry.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">37</span> Why backoff <em>with jitter</em>, not just exponential backoff?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Plain exponential backoff still has every client retrying at the same doubled intervals, so they re-collide in synchronized waves — a self-inflicted thundering herd. Adding <strong>random jitter</strong> spreads the retries across time, smoothing load on the recovering service. Exponential controls the <em>rate</em> of retries; jitter de-correlates <em>when</em> they land.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">38</span> What does a circuit breaker do, and why?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>It watches calls to a dependency; when failures cross a threshold it <strong>"opens"</strong> and fails fast for a cooldown instead of piling more doomed requests onto a struggling service. After the cooldown it goes <strong>"half-open,"</strong> letting a trickle through to test recovery, then closes if they succeed. It stops cascading failure and gives the downstream room to recover rather than being retried to death.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">39</span> When should a server return <code>503</code> with <code>Retry-After</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>503 Service Unavailable</code> signals a <strong>temporary</strong> inability to handle the request — overload, maintenance, a dependency down — and is <em>retryable</em>, unlike most other <code>5xx</code>. Pair it with <code>Retry-After</code> so clients know when to come back instead of retrying immediately and deepening the overload. It's the honest "I'm down right now, come back later" signal.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">40</span> What is graceful degradation and how do you design for it?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Shedding non-essential work to keep the core working under stress rather than failing wholesale. Tactics: <strong>load shedding</strong> (reject excess early with <code>429</code>/<code>503</code> before you fall over), serving <strong>stale-but-cached</strong> data when a dependency is down, disabling expensive optional features, and <strong>prioritizing critical traffic</strong>. The principle: a partial, degraded response beats a total outage — decide in advance what's droppable.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">41</span> How do rate limiting, retries, idempotency, and circuit breakers fit together as one story?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>They're a closed loop. <strong>Rate limits/outages</strong> trigger <strong>retries</strong>; retries need <strong>backoff + jitter</strong> so they don't stampede; retries on writes need <strong>idempotency keys</strong> so they don't duplicate; a persistently failing dependency needs a <strong>circuit breaker</strong> so you stop retrying into the void and <strong>degrade gracefully</strong>; and <strong>observability</strong> (correlation ids, RED, p99, traces) is how you see the whole loop and tune it. Naming the loop, not just one piece, is the staff signal.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Judgment &amp; scenarios</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">42</span> "A partner says our API is impossible to integrate against and keeps falling over." Redesign it.</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Three moves. (1) <strong>One error contract</strong>: RFC 9457 <code>problem+json</code> everywhere, with a stable machine-readable code, a human message, field-level validation errors, correct status codes (<code>400</code> malformed vs <code>422</code> validation), zero internal leakage — plus a published error catalog. (2) <strong>Rate limiting</strong>: token bucket per API key, <code>429</code> + <code>Retry-After</code> + <code>RateLimit-*</code> headers so good clients back off. (3) <strong>Safe retries + visibility</strong>: idempotency keys on writes, and instrument with correlation ids, structured logs, RED metrics (p95/p99), and tracing so you can see where it breaks. Fixes the DX complaint, protects availability, proves observability.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">43</span> Latency just spiked. Walk me through debugging it with the three pillars.</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Metrics</strong> first to localize: which endpoint, is it p99 only or broad, did rate/errors move with it, when did it start (correlate with a deploy/traffic change)? Then <strong>traces</strong> on slow exemplars to see <em>where</em> the time goes across the call graph — a specific downstream, a DB query, lock contention. Then <strong>logs</strong> for that <code>request_id</code> to get the concrete error/parameters. Metrics say <em>what and how bad</em>, traces say <em>where</em>, logs say <em>why</em> — that ordering is the answer.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">44</span> How would you choose a rate-limit algorithm for a public write-heavy API?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Start from the traffic shape and what you're protecting. For spiky-but-bounded client traffic, <strong>token bucket per API key</strong> is the default — absorbs legitimate bursts, enforces a sustained average. If a fragile downstream must see a constant rate, front it with a <strong>leaky bucket</strong>. Avoid plain <strong>fixed window</strong> if boundary bursts could hurt; use <strong>sliding window</strong> when you need smoother enforcement without queueing. Add separate burst vs sustained limits, and tie limits to billing tiers.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">45</span> What should you log, and what must you never log?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Log</strong>: request id/trace id, method, route (templated, not the raw id-filled path), status, latency, principal id, error code, and enough context to debug. <strong>Never log</strong>: secrets and credentials (passwords, tokens, API keys, full card numbers/PANs) and raw <strong>PII</strong> beyond what's lawful and needed. Redact or hash sensitive fields at the logging boundary. Logs are widely accessible and long-lived — treat them as a data-exposure surface.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">46</span> You inherit a fragile, hard-to-integrate API. What's your prioritized remediation plan?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Sequence by leverage. (1) <strong>Stop the bleeding</strong>: add rate limiting + correct status codes so abuse and miscategorized errors stop taking it down. (2) <strong>Make failures legible</strong>: one <code>problem+json</code> contract with stable codes + an error catalog, so partners can integrate. (3) <strong>Make it observable</strong>: correlation ids, structured logs, RED/p99, tracing — so you can see what's actually breaking. (4) <strong>Make recovery safe</strong>: idempotency keys, backoff+jitter guidance, circuit breakers. (5) Define <strong>SLOs/error budgets</strong> to govern further change. Each step is shippable and unblocks the next.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">47</span> How do you decide whether a degradation is "bad enough to page someone" at 3am?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Tie paging to <strong>SLOs and error-budget burn rate</strong>, not raw error counts. Alert on fast budget burn against the user-facing SLI (e.g. p99 latency / success rate), so a page means "users are being hurt at a rate that threatens the budget" — symptom-based, not cause-based. Avoid paging on every internal blip (cause-based noise) that has no user impact. The number, agreed in advance, replaces the 3am judgment call.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">48</span> Why do interviewers probe errors, rate limiting, and observability together?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Because they reveal whether you've actually <em>operated</em> an API in production, not just shipped a happy path. A consistent error contract, principled abuse protection, and real observability are senior table stakes — they decide whether partners can integrate and whether you can see what broke at 3am. Mid-level answers stop at "return 500 and log it."</p></div>
</div>

<hr/>
<p class="src">Interview Bank 9 · pairs with Lesson 9.</p>
</body>
</html>
