<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Glossary — Context Engineering</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<div class="wrap">
<h1>Glossary — Context Engineering</h1>
<p>Covers Lessons 1–9. Grouped by where each term first lands.</p>
<h2>Foundations (L1–2)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Context</b> — everything the model can see for a single call: system prompt + instructions + conversation history + retrieved data + tool definitions/results + the user's query. The model's <em>entire</em> world for that one inference. It has no other access to your data.</li>
<li><b>Context window</b> — the model's fixed maximum number of tokens per call (input + output). A hard ceiling, like total RAM. Exceed it and content must be dropped, truncated, or summarized.</li>
<li><b>Token</b> — the unit the model counts in. A sub-word chunk (~4 chars / ~0.75 words of English on average). Limits, latency, and cost are all measured in tokens, not characters or lines.</li>
<li><b>Working context</b> — the curated subset actually assembled into the window for <em>this</em> turn: the few things relevant right now, not everything that exists. The output of context engineering.</li>
<li><b>Context engineering</b> — the discipline of deciding what to put in the window (and what to leave out) so a fixed model produces the best possible answer. The selection/retrieval/compression/ assembly pipeline that runs <em>before</em> the model.</li>
<li><b>Context assembly</b> — the step that packs selected/retrieved content (plus prompt, history, tools) into the final window, within budget, in an order the model uses well.</li>
<li><b>Context-as-query</b> — the mental model: in classic software the query (SQL) fetches from the DB; in AI the context-retrieval pipeline fetches what the LLM reasons over. The "query" moved from SQL into context assembly.</li>
<li><b>Retrieval quality vs model quality</b> — past a baseline, <em>what you feed</em> the model usually moves answer quality more than <em>which model</em> you use. Right context + smaller model often beats wrong context + best model.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Selection &amp; retrieval (L2)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Selection</b> — choosing the smallest set of content that still contains the answer, within the token budget. Candidate generation → ranking → packing.</li>
<li><b>Lexical / keyword search (BM25)</b> — exact-term matching with TF-IDF/BM25 scoring. Precise on identifiers and exact terms; blind to synonyms (vocabulary mismatch).</li>
<li><b>Semantic / vector search</b> — encode query and chunks as embeddings, retrieve by similarity. Captures meaning and paraphrase; can return "topically similar but wrong"; weak on rare exact tokens.</li>
<li><b>Hybrid search</b> — run lexical + semantic and fuse results (e.g. Reciprocal Rank Fusion). Covers exact <em>and</em> semantic; more infra to tune.</li>
<li><b>Ranking</b> — ordering candidates by a cheap score; first stage optimizes <b>recall</b> (don't miss it).</li>
<li><b>Re-ranking</b> — a second, expensive, accurate stage (e.g. a cross-encoder) that re-scores the top-N jointly with the query; optimizes <b>precision</b>. Can't recover a doc the first stage missed.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Codebase, chunking &amp; RAG (L3)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Repository indexing</b> — building a searchable representation of a codebase (embeddings and/or a symbol/dependency index) so relevant code can be retrieved.</li>
<li><b>Read-on-demand (agentic) context</b> — fetching files live via tools (grep/glob/read) instead of a persistent embedding index. Always fresh; costs tool round-trips. (Claude Code's model.)</li>
<li><b>Chunking</b> — splitting documents into retrievable units. Chunk on meaning/structure, not raw character count.</li>
<li><b>Overlap</b> — sharing boundary text between chunks so a fact spanning a boundary survives.</li>
<li><b>Context fragmentation</b> — a fact split across chunks so no single chunk is complete/retrievable.</li>
<li><b>Contextual chunking/retrieval</b> — prepend a short doc/section-situating summary to each chunk before embedding (and index BM25 too) to cut retrieval failures.</li>
<li><b>RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation)</b> — Question → Retrieval → Assembly → LLM → Answer. Grounds the model in your private/current data; only as good as its retrieval.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Memory, compression &amp; failure modes (L4)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Memory</b> — persisted state the system writes and recalls about an ongoing task/relationship (derived facts, decisions). Reaches the model only via retrieval into context.</li>
<li><b>Knowledge base</b> — the corpus of source documents/facts; usually read-only reference material.</li>
<li><b>Compression</b> — fitting more useful signal into the budget via <b>summarization</b> (condense), <b>distillation</b> (extract salient facts), pruning redundancy, and <b>sliding windows</b> (recent verbatim + rolling summary). Lossy — keep recent turns and decisions verbatim.</li>
<li><b>The 5 failure modes</b> — <b>missing</b> (never retrieved), <b>wrong</b> (irrelevant retrieved), <b>outdated</b> (stale index), <b>conflicting</b> (sources disagree), <b>excessive</b> (too much → noise / lost-in-the-middle). Diagnose by symptom → cause → fix.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Evaluation &amp; observability (L6)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>recall@k</b> — is at least one relevant doc in the top-k. The most important RAG retrieval metric; nothing downstream can use what wasn't retrieved.</li>
<li><b>precision@k</b> — fraction of the top-k that are relevant.</li>
<li><b>MRR (mean reciprocal rank)</b> — how high the first relevant result sits.</li>
<li><b>nDCG</b> — graded, position-discounted relevance; rewards putting the best at the top.</li>
<li><b>Faithfulness / groundedness</b> — is every claim in the answer supported by the retrieved context (detects hallucination).</li>
<li><b>Context precision / recall</b> — are retrieved chunks relevant and well-ranked (precision); did retrieval capture everything the ideal answer needs (recall, needs ground truth). RAGAS vocabulary.</li>
<li><b>Golden set</b> — a versioned eval set of (query, relevant doc IDs, ideal answer) for offline regression testing.</li>
<li><b>Offline vs online eval</b> — offline = regression on the golden set before deploy; online = production signals (thumbs, deflection/escalation, citation-clicks, rephrase rate).</li>
<li><b>LLM-as-judge</b> — using an LLM to score faithfulness/relevance at scale (needs calibration).</li>
</ul>
<h2>Pre-retrieval &amp; advanced RAG (L7)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Query rewriting</b> — clean/expand/disambiguate the raw query before retrieval.</li>
<li><b>Multi-query</b> — generate several paraphrases, retrieve for each, union the results (boosts recall).</li>
<li><b>HyDE (Hypothetical Document Embeddings)</b> — embed a generated hypothetical <em>answer</em> (not the question) to bridge the query↔document vocabulary gap.</li>
<li><b>Query decomposition</b> — split a complex question into sub-queries, retrieve each, combine.</li>
<li><b>Step-back prompting</b> — ask a broader question first to pull grounding, then the specific one.</li>
<li><b>Routing</b> — classify the query and send it to the right index/datasource/tool.</li>
<li><b>Parent-document / small-to-big</b> — match small precise chunks but return the larger parent for context.</li>
<li><b>GraphRAG</b> — retrieve over an entity/knowledge graph (subgraphs + community summaries); wins on global "connect-the-dots across the corpus" questions.</li>
<li><b>Agentic RAG</b> — the LLM decides whether/what/when to retrieve, iterating in a loop.</li>
<li><b>Self-RAG / Corrective RAG (CRAG)</b> — the model critiques its own retrieval/answer; CRAG grades retrieved docs and falls back (e.g. web search) when quality is low.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Embeddings, indexing &amp; cost (L8)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Embedding</b> — a dense vector capturing meaning; near vectors ≈ similar meaning.</li>
<li><b>Similarity metric</b> — cosine (most common), dot product, or Euclidean distance over embeddings.</li>
<li><b>ANN (approximate nearest neighbor)</b> — trade a little recall for large speed at scale; exact k-NN is O(n) per query.</li>
<li><b>HNSW / IVF / PQ</b> — vector index families: graph-based (fast, high recall, memory-heavy) / clustering (probe a few cells) / product quantization (compress vectors, lower recall). The recall ↔ latency ↔ memory trade-off.</li>
<li><b>Metadata filtering</b> — pre/post-filtering candidates by attributes (date, type, tenant); also an access-control hook.</li>
<li><b>Index freshness / invalidation</b> — keeping the index current (incremental updates, CDC, re-embedding on model change); a stale index <em>is</em> the "outdated context" failure mode.</li>
</ul>
<h2>Caching, ordering &amp; security (L9)</h2>
<ul class="gloss">
<li><b>Prompt / KV caching</b> — reusing the processed state of a stable prefix across calls to cut cost and latency. Put stable content (system prompt, tools) first, volatile content (query, retrieved docs) last; any change busts the cache from that point on.</li>
<li><b>Lost in the middle</b> — models attend most to the start (primacy) and end (recency) of the window, weakest in the middle. Order matters: put the query last and the best doc at an edge.</li>
<li><b>Indirect prompt injection</b> — a malicious instruction hidden in <em>retrieved</em> content that the model may obey. Treat all retrieved content as untrusted data, never as instructions.</li>
<li><b>Multi-tenant access control</b> — enforce row/document-level permissions in the <em>retrieval query</em> (scope by tenant/ACL before anything reaches the model). Never rely on the prompt to enforce access.</li>
</ul>
</div>
</body>
</html>
