<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Review guides &amp; self-test</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Review guides, self-test &amp; what to read next</h1>

<h2>Quick self-test (answers marked)</h2>
<p class="tagline">Cover the right column with your thumb, pick, then check.</p>
<div class="quiz">
<p class="q">1 · Who executes a tool call?</p>
<p class="opt">The LLM runs it internally</p>
<p class="opt correct">The runtime runs it; the model only emitted the request</p>
<p class="opt">The MCP protocol runs it</p>

<p class="q">2 · "The model remembers our last message" is wrong because…</p>
<p class="opt correct">the runtime re-sends the history; the model is stateless</p>
<p class="opt">memory lives in the model weights</p>
<p class="opt">the context window caches between calls</p>

<p class="q">3 · The difference between a workflow and an agent is…</p>
<p class="opt">an agent uses a bigger model</p>
<p class="opt">a workflow can't call tools</p>
<p class="opt correct">who writes the control flow — the developer, or the model</p>

<p class="q">4 · MCP exists primarily to…</p>
<p class="opt correct">turn N×M bespoke integrations into N+M via one standard</p>
<p class="opt">make the model run tools faster</p>
<p class="opt">give one vendor exclusive tool access</p>

<p class="q">5 · The agent loop is best compared to…</p>
<p class="opt">a database transaction</p>
<p class="opt correct">a Kubernetes reconciliation loop driving toward desired state</p>
<p class="opt">a message queue</p>

<p class="q">6 · Single vs multi-agent maps cleanly onto…</p>
<p class="opt">sync vs async calls</p>
<p class="opt correct">a monolith vs a microservices architecture</p>
<p class="opt">a read replica vs a primary</p>
</div>

<h2>Reconstruct the stack from memory</h2>
<p>The real test: write the ten levels in order, one line each, with the book closed. Then check against the spine:</p>
<div class="box">
<p><strong>1</strong> LLM stateless text→text · <strong>2</strong> Tool: model requests, runtime runs · <strong>3</strong> Agent = LLM+tools+loop+goal · <strong>4</strong> Loop: observe→think→act→repeat · <strong>5</strong> Runtime: app server + guardrails · <strong>6</strong> Memory: runtime reloads (RAM vs disk) · <strong>7</strong> Workflow vs Agent: who writes the if/else · <strong>8</strong> MCP: USB-C; server/client/registry; N×M→N+M · <strong>9</strong> Single vs Multi: monolith vs microservices · <strong>10</strong> Archetypes: same engine + different tools + job.</p>
</div>

<h2>5-minute review (weekly)</h2>
<p>Don't re-read — recall. Say the one sentence; redraw the request path and the loop from memory; recite the ten rules; translate three buzzwords blind. Anything that stalls is your cue for the deep dive.</p>

<h2>30-minute deep dive (when a step stalled)</h2>
<p>Blank-page reconstruct all ten levels (~8 min). Then re-derive the <em>chain of necessity</em> — why each layer forces the next: stateless LLM → tools → loop → runtime → memory → workflow/agent → MCP → single/multi → archetypes (~10 min). Then apply it: take one real product and place it (workflow/agent? single/multi? which archetype? which tools?) (~7 min). Re-read the myth-vs-truth lines for the two levels you missed (~5 min).</p>

<h2>What to read next (in order)</h2>
<ol>
<li><em>Building effective agents</em> — Anthropic Engineering (Levels 1–7; read first): anthropic.com/engineering/building-effective-agents</li>
<li><em>Model Context Protocol</em> docs (Level 8): modelcontextprotocol.io</li>
<li><em>How we built our multi-agent research system</em> — Anthropic, Jun 2025 (Level 9): anthropic.com/engineering/multi-agent-research-system</li>
<li><em>Claude Agent SDK</em> — the loop as code: docs.claude.com/en/api/agent-sdk/overview</li>
</ol>

<hr/>
<p class="src"><strong>Sources.</strong> Anthropic, <em>Building effective agents</em> (augmented LLM; workflow-vs-agent). Anthropic, <em>How we built our multi-agent research system</em>, Jun 2025 (orchestrator-worker; +90.2% at ~15× tokens). <em>Model Context Protocol</em>, modelcontextprotocol.io ("USB-C for AI"; servers &amp; clients). Anthropic, <em>Claude Agent SDK</em> (a concrete runtime).</p>
<p class="note">Companion to the interactive web lesson in the <code>ai-agents-mastery</code> teaching workspace. Ask your teacher (the agent) to grill you or build the next lesson.</p>
</body>
</html>
