<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Caching &amp; conditional requests — interview questions</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="kicker">Interview Bank 7 · Performance &amp; Scale</p>
<h1>Caching &amp; conditional requests — interview questions</h1>
<p class="meta">Core / Senior / Staff · answer from memory first</p>

<div class="box"><span class="label">How to use</span> Answer from memory FIRST, then check below.</div>

<h2>Freshness — Cache-Control</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">01</span> What are the two distinct halves of HTTP caching?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Freshness</strong> lets a cache reuse a stored response with <em>no network call at all</em>. <strong>Validation</strong> lets a cache cheaply confirm a stored response is still good via a round-trip that carries no body. Conflating the two is the tell of a shallow answer — you design with both: aggressive freshness for the common case, validation as the cheap fallback when freshness lapses.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">02</span> What does <code>Cache-Control: max-age=N</code> mean, and what happens while a response is fresh?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The response is fresh for <code>N</code> seconds. While it's fresh, a cache serves it <strong>directly from storage with zero contact with the origin</strong> — no revalidation, no round-trip. That's the whole win of freshness.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">03</span> What's the difference between <code>public</code> and <code>private</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>public</code> may be stored by <em>any</em> cache, including shared ones (CDN/proxy). <code>private</code> restricts storage to the end user's own browser — never a shared cache. <code>private</code> is the guard for per-user payloads.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">04</span> How do <code>s-maxage</code> and <code>max-age</code> differ, and why have both?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Both set a freshness lifetime in seconds, but <code>s-maxage</code> applies only to <strong>shared</strong> caches and overrides <code>max-age</code> there. Having both lets you tune the CDN/proxy lifetime independently of the browser's — e.g. a long <code>s-maxage</code> at the edge with a short <code>max-age</code> in the browser, so you can purge the edge but clients still come back soon.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">05</span> <code>no-store</code> vs <code>no-cache</code> — what's the difference? (Most candidates trip here.)</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>no-store</code> means <strong>never write it to any cache</strong> — the directive for genuinely sensitive data. <code>no-cache</code> is confusingly named: it <em>does</em> store the response, but must <strong>revalidate with the origin before every reuse</strong> (expecting a <code>304</code>). So <code>no-cache</code> still saves bandwidth on unchanged bodies; <code>no-store</code> saves nothing because nothing is kept.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">06</span> What does <code>must-revalidate</code> add on top of normal freshness?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Once a response goes <em>stale</em>, a cache may not serve it without first revalidating with the origin — it <strong>forbids serving stale on error</strong> (e.g. when the origin is unreachable). Without it, some caches are permitted to serve stale content as a fallback; <code>must-revalidate</code> says "correctness over availability for this resource."</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">07</span> What does <code>stale-while-revalidate=N</code> buy you?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>When a response goes stale, the cache may <strong>serve the stale copy instantly</strong> while it refreshes in the background (for up to <code>N</code> seconds past expiry). It hides revalidation latency from the user entirely — the user never waits on the origin — at the cost of occasionally seeing slightly stale data. Great for read-heavy content where a few seconds of staleness is harmless.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">08</span> How does <code>Expires</code> relate to <code>Cache-Control: max-age</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>Expires</code> is the legacy form: an absolute timestamp at which the response goes stale. <code>Cache-Control: max-age</code> supersedes it (and wins where both appear) because a relative lifetime <strong>avoids clock-skew bugs</strong> between client and server. Treat <code>Expires</code> as a backward-compat fallback only.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">09</span> When does a response become "stale," and what happens next?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>A response is fresh until its computed lifetime (<code>max-age</code>/<code>s-maxage</code>/<code>Expires</code>) elapses; after that it's <strong>stale</strong>. Stale doesn't mean discarded — a cache typically <em>revalidates</em> it (a conditional request) rather than re-downloading, and may serve it via <code>stale-while-revalidate</code>, or must refresh first if <code>must-revalidate</code> is set.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Validation — ETag &amp; Last-Modified</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">10</span> What is an <code>ETag</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>An <strong>opaque version tag for a representation</strong> — the server's fingerprint of that exact revision. The client doesn't parse it; it just stores it and echoes it back. It's the basis for both cache validation and conditional writes.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">11</span> Walk through a conditional <code>GET</code> with <code>If-None-Match</code>. What status comes back if nothing changed?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The client sends the stored <code>ETag</code> in <code>If-None-Match</code>. If the representation still matches, the server returns <code>304 Not Modified</code> <strong>with no body</strong> — the client reuses its cached copy. Only if it changed does the server return <code>200</code> with the full body.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">12</span> What's the bandwidth win of a conditional <code>GET</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>On the common "still good" case you pay only for a small request plus a tiny <code>304</code> header response — <strong>no entity body crosses the wire</strong>. You still make a round-trip (so you don't save latency), but you skip re-transferring a potentially large payload. It's the cheap fallback when freshness has lapsed.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">13</span> How does <code>Last-Modified</code> / <code>If-Modified-Since</code> work?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The server sends a <code>Last-Modified</code> timestamp; the client echoes it as <code>If-Modified-Since</code> on the next request. If the resource hasn't changed since that time, the server returns <code>304</code>. It's the timestamp-based validator — the fallback when you can't compute an <code>ETag</code> cheaply.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">14</span> Why is <code>ETag</code> generally preferred over <code>Last-Modified</code>?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>Last-Modified</code> is weaker: it has <strong>one-second granularity</strong> (sub-second changes are invisible), depends on clocks, and can't distinguish a touch-without-change from a real edit. An <code>ETag</code> is content-derived and exact. Use <code>Last-Modified</code> only when computing an ETag is too costly, and you can serve both — clients then prefer the ETag.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">15</span> Strong vs weak ETags (<code>"abc"</code> vs <code>W/"abc"</code>) — what's the distinction and when do you use each?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>A <strong>strong</strong> validator means <em>byte-for-byte identical</em>. A <strong>weak</strong> one (<code>W/</code> prefix) means <em>semantically equivalent</em> — the payload may differ cosmetically (whitespace, a regenerated timestamp) but is "the same" for the user. Strong is required for <code>Range</code> requests and is what you want for concurrency control; weak is fine for cache revalidation of responses that vary only cosmetically.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">16</span> Does receiving a <code>304</code> let the cache extend the freshness lifetime?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Yes. A <code>304</code> isn't just "still valid" — it can carry updated headers (e.g. a fresh <code>Cache-Control</code>/<code>Expires</code>) that <strong>reset the freshness window</strong>. So a revalidated entry becomes fresh again and can be served without further origin calls until it next lapses.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">17</span> How would you generate ETags, and what's the cost trade-off?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Two families: <strong>content hashes</strong> (hash the serialized body) — exact but you pay CPU to render and hash on every request, even ones that end in a <code>304</code>; or <strong>version metadata</strong> (a row's <code>updated_at</code> or a monotonic version column) — cheap to read, strong if the version is reliable, and computable without rendering the full body. At scale, prefer a stored version/sequence number so you can answer a conditional request without materializing the representation. Watch out for hashing that differs across nodes (key ordering, serializer version) — it'll break revalidation and tank your hit rate.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Conditional writes — optimistic concurrency</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">18</span> What is the lost-update problem?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Two clients <code>GET</code> the same resource, both edit their copy, both <code>PUT</code> — and the second write <strong>silently overwrites the first</strong>, losing it without anyone noticing. It's the canonical concurrency hazard for read-modify-write over a stateless protocol.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">19</span> How does <code>If-Match</code> prevent lost updates, end to end?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The client <code>GET</code>s the resource and its <code>ETag</code>, then sends <code>If-Match: "&lt;etag&gt;"</code> on the <code>PUT</code>/<code>PATCH</code>. The server applies the write only if the current ETag still matches. If the resource changed underneath, the ETag no longer matches and the server returns <code>412 Precondition Failed</code> — the write is rejected and the client must <strong>re-fetch and reconcile</strong> rather than clobber. This is <strong>optimistic concurrency control</strong>.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">20</span> What status code signals a failed precondition, and what does the client do?</p>
<div class="answer"><p><code>412 Precondition Failed</code>. The client should re-<code>GET</code> the resource (and its new ETag), merge or re-apply its change against the current state, and retry the write with the updated <code>If-Match</code>.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">21</span> How do you get a race-free "create only if it doesn't exist"?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Send <code>If-None-Match: *</code> on the create (e.g. a <code>PUT</code> to the target URI). It tells the server "succeed only if no representation currently exists." If another request already created it, the precondition fails (<code>412</code>), so two concurrent creators can't both win — a clean create-only without a separate lock.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">22</span> Why is optimistic concurrency a better fit for a web API than pessimistic locking?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Holding a lock <strong>across stateless requests violates statelessness</strong>, ties up resources, and breaks badly when a client vanishes mid-edit (who releases the lock?). Optimistic control assumes conflicts are rare, <strong>costs nothing on the happy path</strong>, and detects conflicts only at write time. You trade "guaranteed no conflict" for "cheap, lock-free, and naturally fits HTTP."</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">23</span> When <em>would</em> you reach for pessimistic locking despite all that?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>When conflicts are <strong>frequent</strong> (so optimistic retries thrash), when the edit is long and expensive and you don't want users to lose work at save time, or when external/irreversible side effects make late conflict detection unacceptable. Then a <em>scoped</em> lock — short-lived, with a lease/TTL so a vanished client auto-releases — can beat retry storms. The senior framing: optimistic by default, pessimistic only where conflict probability or cost-of-rework justifies the statefulness.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">24</span> Is the ETag-on-write check itself atomic, or do you still need DB-level guarantees?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The HTTP layer only <em>communicates</em> the precondition; you still need atomicity at the store. The compare-and-write must be a single atomic step — e.g. <code>UPDATE … WHERE id=? AND version=?</code> and check rows-affected, or a transaction — otherwise two requests can both pass an ETag check and then race on the actual write. <code>If-Match</code> is the protocol; the version-guarded conditional update is the enforcement.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">25</span> Same ETag drives caching and concurrency — articulate why that's elegant, and any tension.</p>
<div class="answer"><p>One value, two jobs: <em>read</em> it back as <code>If-None-Match</code> and you get a <code>304</code> cache validation; <em>send</em> it back as <code>If-Match</code> on a write and you get optimistic locking. Elegant because the server maintains a single version notion. The tension: concurrency wants a <strong>strong, exact</strong> validator (any change must fail the write), while cache revalidation tolerates a <strong>weak</strong> one — so if you serve weak ETags for cosmetic-variance caching, don't reuse them for <code>If-Match</code>, or you'll accept writes against a "semantically equal" but actually-different revision.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Shared caches, layers &amp; Vary</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">26</span> Private vs shared caches — name where each lives.</p>
<div class="answer"><p><strong>Private</strong> caches are per-user — the browser's own cache. <strong>Shared</strong> caches are one node many users hit — CDNs, reverse proxies, API gateways. A shared cache amplifies hit rate across all clients, which is exactly why getting its keying and scoping right matters so much.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">27</span> How do caching layers map onto REST's constraints?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>They sit at the intersection of two constraints: <strong>cacheable</strong> (responses label their own reusability so intermediaries can store them) and <strong>layered system</strong> (a client can't tell whether it's talking to the origin or an intermediary, so caches/proxies can be inserted transparently). Cache headers are the contract that makes those layers safe.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">28</span> What is the cache key by default, and what does <code>Vary</code> change?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>By default a cache keys on the <strong>request URL</strong> (plus method). <code>Vary</code> adds named request headers to that key so different header values get different cache entries — e.g. <code>Vary: Accept</code> partitions JSON from XML, <code>Vary: Accept-Encoding</code> separates gzip from brotli. Get it wrong and the cache serves the wrong representation — or worse, the wrong user's data.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">29</span> Why is <code>Vary: Authorization</code> a cache-efficiency trap on a shared cache?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>It's <em>safe</em> — each token gets its own entry, so no cross-user leak — but it shreds your hit rate to near zero on a shared cache, because every distinct token (effectively every user, and every token rotation) is a separate cache entry that almost never gets a second hit. For per-user data, <code>private</code>/<code>no-store</code> is usually the honest choice; reserve shared caching for responses that are genuinely the same across users, and key them on something coarser than the raw token (e.g. a normalized scope/role) when you can.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">30</span> What cache-invalidation strategies do you have, and their trade-offs?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Roughly four: (1) <strong>TTL expiry</strong> — simplest, but you serve stale until it lapses; (2) <strong>active purge/ban</strong> on write — fresh immediately but needs a control path to every cache node and is hard to make exactly-once; (3) <strong>versioned/fingerprinted URLs</strong> (cache-busting) — bulletproof for immutable assets, awkward for mutable API resources; (4) <strong>validation</strong> (ETags + revalidation) — never serves wrong data, but pays a round-trip. Most real systems combine short TTL + revalidation, with targeted purge for the few resources that must update instantly. "Cache invalidation is one of the two hard problems" — name that you're choosing a point on the staleness-vs-cost curve, not eliminating it.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">31</span> A write happens at the origin but a CDN still serves the old copy. What's going on and how do you fix it?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The edge entry is still within its <code>s-maxage</code> freshness window, so the CDN serves it without asking the origin — by design. Fixes: shorten <code>s-maxage</code> and lean on revalidation; issue an explicit <strong>purge/ban</strong> to the CDN on write (eventual, per-POP propagation, so allow a moment); or use <code>stale-while-revalidate</code> so the next request triggers a background refresh. Pick based on how tight your staleness SLA is — instant correctness means active purge plus a short TTL as a safety net.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Pitfalls</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="qnum">32</span> What's the classic auth + caching pitfall?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>An authenticated, user-specific response that a <strong>shared</strong> cache stores can be <strong>served to the next user</strong> — leaking one person's data to another. It happens whenever such a response lacks <code>private</code>/<code>no-store</code> and doesn't <code>Vary</code> on the credential.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">33</span> What's the safe baseline for caching authenticated responses?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Default per-user responses to <code>Cache-Control: private, no-store</code>. If you genuinely want a shared cache to hold them, you must <code>Vary: Authorization</code> so each token gets its own entry — but accept that this usually kills shared-cache benefit, so reserve it for cases that measurably pay off. When in doubt, <code>private, no-store</code> is the conservative, leak-proof choice.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">34</span> Can you cache <code>POST</code> responses? Should you?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>By spec a <code>POST</code> response is cacheable only if it carries explicit freshness <em>and</em> a <code>Content-Location</code>, and in practice almost no cache does it — <code>POST</code> isn't safe or idempotent, so caching it is dangerous. The right move for a cacheable read is to model it as a <code>GET</code> (e.g. push complex query params into a <code>GET</code> with a sane URL) rather than fighting to cache a <code>POST</code>. If a "search" must be a <code>POST</code> for body-size reasons, accept it won't be HTTP-cached and cache at the application layer instead.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">35</span> What are the real costs/risks of serving stale data?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Caching trades freshness for speed and load. The risk is context-dependent: stale a product description is harmless; stale a price, an inventory count, a permission, or an account balance can be wrong, costly, or a security issue. The senior move is to <strong>set TTLs per resource by tolerance for staleness</strong>, not one blanket policy — short or validation-only for sensitive/volatile data, long for stable content.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">36</span> A developer sets <code>no-cache</code> intending "don't cache this." What actually happens?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The opposite of their intent: the response <em>is</em> stored, it just gets revalidated before each reuse. If they truly want nothing stored, they need <code>no-store</code>. This naming confusion is one of the most common caching bugs — worth flagging explicitly.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">37</span> What goes wrong if you forget <code>Vary</code> on a content-negotiated endpoint?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The cache keys on URL alone, so the first representation it stores for that URL gets served to <em>everyone</em> regardless of their <code>Accept</code>/<code>Accept-Encoding</code> — a JSON client gets XML, a brotli-less client gets brotli, etc. The fix is correct <code>Vary</code>; the second-order trap is over-varying (e.g. on a high-cardinality header) which fragments the cache and destroys hit rate. <code>Vary</code> is a balance: enough to be correct, no more.</p></div>
</div>

<h2>Judgment &amp; design</h2>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">38</span> "Two users open the same document and both hit Save. How do you stop the second save from clobbering the first?" (~60s.)</p>
<div class="answer"><p>That's the lost-update problem; I solve it with optimistic concurrency via ETags. The <code>GET</code> returns the document plus a strong <code>ETag</code> for that revision. Any update must send it as <code>If-Match: &lt;etag&gt;</code>. If the doc changed since the client read it, the ETag won't match and the server returns <code>412 Precondition Failed</code>, so the second save is rejected and that client must re-fetch and merge instead of overwriting. I prefer this to pessimistic locking, which fits a stateless API poorly — it strands a lock across requests if a client walks away. And it's the same <code>ETag</code> that drives <code>304</code> conditional GETs for caching: one value, two jobs.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">39</span> Design a caching strategy for a read-heavy public API.</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Layer it. (1) Classify endpoints by volatility and audience — public-and-stable, public-and-volatile, per-user. (2) For public-stable: <code>public</code>, generous <code>s-maxage</code> at the CDN, shorter <code>max-age</code> in the browser, plus ETags so lapsed entries revalidate cheaply, and <code>stale-while-revalidate</code> to hide refresh latency. (3) For public-volatile: short TTL or validation-only, with active purge on write where instant correctness matters. (4) For per-user: <code>private</code>/<code>no-store</code>, served close to origin. (5) Set <code>Vary</code> precisely (<code>Accept</code>, <code>Accept-Encoding</code>) and never over-vary. (6) Measure cache hit rate and origin offload as the success metric. The framing: aggressive freshness for the common case, validation as the cheap fallback, purge only where staleness is unacceptable.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">40</span> How do a CDN and an API tier divide caching responsibilities?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>The <strong>CDN/edge</strong> handles shared, anonymous, high-fanout reads — tuned via <code>s-maxage</code>, purge, and <code>stale-while-revalidate</code> — offloading the origin and cutting latency geographically. The <strong>API tier</strong> owns correctness: it emits the cache headers, computes ETags, enforces conditional writes (<code>If-Match</code> → <code>412</code>), and decides what is cacheable at all. Per-user/authenticated traffic largely bypasses the CDN (<code>private</code>) and may be cached internally (e.g. an app/Redis layer keyed by user+resource) where you control invalidation.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="qnum">41</span> When should you deliberately NOT cache?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>When staleness is unacceptable or unsafe: real-time/volatile values (live prices, balances, inventory at checkout), per-user sensitive data on shared caches, anything behind authorization where a stale permission is a security risk, and one-shot/side-effecting responses. Also skip it when hit rates would be near zero (highly personalized or rarely-repeated requests) — the cache then adds complexity and invalidation risk for no benefit. "Don't cache" is a legitimate, deliberate design choice, not a failure.</p></div>
</div>

<div class="qa">
<p class="q"><span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span> <span class="qnum">42</span> How do you decide a TTL for a given endpoint?</p>
<div class="answer"><p>Work backwards from <strong>tolerable staleness</strong>, not from a default. Ask: how wrong can this be, for how long, before it harms a user or the business? That sets the ceiling. Then weigh write frequency (frequent writes + long TTL = lots of stale serves unless you purge), traffic shape (high fanout makes even a short TTL pay off), and your invalidation capability (if you can purge on write, you can run a longer TTL safely). Express it per resource class, validate with real hit-rate/staleness metrics, and revisit — TTLs are a tuning knob, not a constant.</p></div>
</div>

<hr/>
<p class="src">Interview Bank 7 · pairs with Lesson 7.</p>
</body>
</html>
