<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>API Security, Auth &amp; Rate Limiting</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="kicker">Reference · Security</p>
<h1>API Security, Auth &amp; Rate Limiting</h1>
<p class="meta">The compressed essence. One page to glance at before an interview or a design review. Definitions live in <code>GLOSSARY.md</code>.</p>

<h2>AuthN vs AuthZ</h2>
<p>Two questions, two failure codes — keep them distinct.</p>
<dl>
<dt>Authentication — <em>who you are</em></dt>
<dd>Establishes identity. Missing or invalid credentials → <code>401 Unauthorized</code>. <span class="note">→ The client hasn't proven who it is.</span></dd>
<dt>Authorization — <em>what you may do</em></dt>
<dd>Establishes permission once identity is known. Known principal, not permitted → <code>403 Forbidden</code>. <span class="note">→ We know who you are; you simply can't do this.</span></dd>
</dl>

<h2>Credential schemes</h2>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Scheme</th><th>Use when</th><th>Watch out</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>API key</td><td>Server-to-server, simple identification of a calling app</td><td>Coarse-grained; hard to scope or rotate; never expose in a browser or in the URL</td></tr>
<tr><td>Bearer token</td><td>Caller presents a token it holds — sent in the <code>Authorization</code> header</td><td>Whoever holds it can use it; protect in transit, keep out of logs/URLs</td></tr>
<tr><td>OAuth 2.0</td><td>Delegated authorization — let an app act on a user's behalf without their password</td><td>It is a <strong>delegated-authorization framework, NOT authentication</strong> by itself</td></tr>
<tr><td>OIDC</td><td>You need to authenticate (identify) the end user — "sign in with…"</td><td>Adds an identity/authentication layer <em>on top of</em> OAuth 2; don't conflate the two</td></tr>
<tr><td>mTLS</td><td>Service-to-service strong identity (both ends present certs)</td><td>Cert lifecycle / rotation overhead; usually internal, not public clients</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<h2>OAuth 2.0 grant types</h2>
<p>Tokens carry <strong>scopes</strong> (coarse permissions) and an <strong>audience</strong> (<code>aud</code>) naming the intended resource.</p>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Grant</th><th>Use for</th><th>Note</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Authorization Code + PKCE</td><td>Users on web / mobile / SPA</td><td>PKCE protects <em>public</em> clients (no client secret) against code interception</td></tr>
<tr><td>Client Credentials</td><td>Machine-to-machine, no user present</td><td>App authenticates as itself with its own secret</td></tr>
<tr><td>Implicit</td><td>—</td><td><strong>LEGACY · do not use</strong> (superseded by Code + PKCE)</td></tr>
<tr><td>Resource-Owner Password</td><td>—</td><td><strong>LEGACY · do not use</strong> (app handles the user's password)</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<h2>JWT vs server-side sessions</h2>
<table>
<thead><tr><th> </th><th>JWT (token)</th><th>Server-side session</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Shape</td><td>Self-contained, signed: <code>header.payload.signature</code></td><td>Opaque session id; data lives server-side</td></tr>
<tr><td>Validation</td><td>Stateless — any node verifies the signature locally (fits REST statelessness)</td><td>Stateful — shared store or sticky sessions required</td></tr>
<tr><td>Confidentiality</td><td>base64 is <em>encoded, not encrypted</em> — put no secrets inside</td><td>Payload never leaves the server</td></tr>
<tr><td>Revocation</td><td>Hard before expiry → short-lived access tokens + rotating refresh tokens + denylist / introspection</td><td>Easy — delete the session</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<p class="note"><strong>JWT validation checklist:</strong> verify the signature; <em>pin the algorithm</em> (reject <code>alg: none</code> and alg-confusion); check <code>iss</code>, <code>aud</code>, and <code>exp</code>/<code>nbf</code>. The stateless win is real, but you trade away easy revocation — pure statelessness vs. instant logout is the design tension.</p>

<h2>Authorization models</h2>
<dl>
<dt>RBAC — role-based</dt>
<dd>Permissions attach to roles; principals get roles. Simple, coarse. <span class="note">→ "editors can publish."</span></dd>
<dt>ABAC — attribute-based</dt>
<dd>Decisions from attributes of subject / resource / environment. Fine-grained, dynamic. <span class="note">→ "owner can edit during business hours."</span></dd>
<dt>Object-level authZ <em>(the one that bites)</em></dt>
<dd>Verify the principal owns or may act on <strong>this specific object</strong> — not merely that they're authenticated. <span class="note">→ Missing this check is OWASP API1 / BOLA, the #1 API risk.</span></dd>
</dl>

<h2>OWASP API Security Top 10 (2023)</h2>
<p>Condensed. <a href="https://owasp.org/API-Security/editions/2023/en/0x11-t10/">OWASP API Security Top 10</a>.</p>
<ol>
<li><strong>BOLA</strong> — Broken Object Level Authorization (API1) <strong>· #1 / most common</strong></li>
<li>Broken Authentication (API2)</li>
<li>BOPLA — Broken Object Property Level Authorization (API3)</li>
<li>Unrestricted Resource Consumption (API4)</li>
<li>BFLA — Broken Function Level Authorization (API5)</li>
<li>Unrestricted Access to Sensitive Business Flows (API6)</li>
<li>Server-Side Request Forgery (SSRF) (API7)</li>
<li>Security Misconfiguration (API8)</li>
<li>Improper Inventory Management (API9)</li>
<li>Unsafe Consumption of APIs (API10)</li>
</ol>

<h2>Rate limiting</h2>
<p>On throttle return <code>429 Too Many Requests</code> + <code>Retry-After</code>; expose <code>RateLimit-Limit</code> / <code>RateLimit-Remaining</code> / <code>RateLimit-Reset</code>. Limit per principal / key / account (per IP for anonymous). Protects availability (OWASP API4).</p>
<table>
<thead><tr><th>Algorithm</th><th>Behaviour</th></tr></thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td>Fixed window</td><td>Count per clock window. Simple, but allows <em>boundary bursts</em> at window edges.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Sliding window</td><td>Rolling interval — smoother than fixed; no edge double-spend.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Token bucket</td><td>Bursts up to a cap, then steady refill. <em>Common</em> — allows spikes within limits.</td></tr>
<tr><td>Leaky bucket</td><td>Drains at a constant rate — smooths the <em>output</em> regardless of input bursts.</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<h2>Hygiene checklist</h2>
<dl>
<dt>Transport &amp; storage</dt>
<dd>TLS everywhere; never put tokens in URLs / query strings (they land in logs and history).</dd>
<dt>Browser cookies</dt>
<dd>Set <code>HttpOnly</code> + <code>Secure</code> + <code>SameSite</code>.</dd>
<dt>Secrets &amp; scope</dt>
<dd>Rotate secrets regularly; grant least-privilege scopes.</dd>
<dt>Errors</dt>
<dd>Consistent <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9457.html">RFC 9457</a> Problem Details that leak no internals (no stack traces, no internal IDs).</dd>
</dl>

<hr/>
<p class="src">Reference · sources: <a href="https://owasp.org/API-Security/editions/2023/en/0x11-t10/">OWASP API Security Top 10 (2023)</a>, <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749">OAuth 2.0 (RFC 6749)</a>, <a href="https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/">OpenID Connect</a>, <a href="https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9457.html">RFC 9457 Problem Details</a> (links above).</p>
</body>
</html>
