<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Idempotency &amp; Retries</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<p class="kicker">Reference · Reliability</p>
<h1>Idempotency &amp; Retries</h1>
<p class="meta">The compressed essence. One page to glance at before an interview or a design review.</p>

<h2>Quick definitions</h2>
<dl>
<dt>Safe</dt>
<dd>Read-only <em>intent</em> — no intended state change. <code>GET</code>, <code>HEAD</code>, <code>OPTIONS</code>. <span class="note">→ "Safe" is about intent, not "secure" and not "side-effect-free" (a GET may still log).</span></dd>
<dt>Idempotent</dt>
<dd>N identical requests ≡ one request's effect on state. <code>GET</code>, <code>HEAD</code>, <code>OPTIONS</code>, <code>PUT</code>, <code>DELETE</code>. <span class="note">→ The property that makes a request safe to <em>retry</em>.</span></dd>
<dt><code>POST</code> — not idempotent</dt>
<dd>Each call can create another resource / charge again. <span class="note">→ Needs an <code>Idempotency-Key</code> to be retried safely.</span></dd>
<dt><code>PATCH</code> — not guaranteed</dt>
<dd>Depends entirely on the patch document. <span class="note">→ A "set field to X" patch is idempotent; an "increment by 1" patch is not.</span></dd>
</dl>

<h2>The Idempotency-Key pattern</h2>
<p>Make a non-idempotent operation safe to retry by deduplicating on a client-supplied key. See <a href="https://docs.stripe.com/api/idempotent_requests">Stripe — Idempotent requests</a>.</p>
<ol>
<li>Client generates a <strong>unique key per logical operation</strong> (UUID v4) — not per HTTP attempt.</li>
<li>Client sends it in the <code>Idempotency-Key</code> request header.</li>
<li>Server, <strong>before executing</strong>, looks up the key in a durable store.</li>
<li><strong>Miss</strong> → execute inside a transaction that <em>also</em> persists the key + resulting status code + response body + a fingerprint of the request.</li>
<li><strong>Hit</strong> → return the stored response <strong>without re-executing</strong>.</li>
<li>Keys expire after a <strong>TTL</strong> (Stripe ≈ 24h).</li>
<li>If a retry's body differs from the stored fingerprint → <strong>reject</strong> (key reuse for a different request).</li>
</ol>

<h2>Implementation checklist</h2>
<dl>
<dt>Durable store</dt>
<dd>A DB table or Redis with a TTL — must survive a process crash mid-request.</dd>
<dt>Persist the whole outcome</dt>
<dd>Status code + response body + request fingerprint, so replays are byte-identical and reuse is detectable.</dd>
<dt>Concurrency control</dt>
<dd>Enforce a <strong>UNIQUE constraint</strong> or lock on the key so two in-flight requests can't both execute — the loser waits or gets <code>409</code>.</dd>
<dt>Scope the key</dt>
<dd>Per endpoint + per account, so collisions and cross-tenant leakage can't happen.</dd>
<dt>Apply selectively</dt>
<dd>Only on <strong>unsafe / non-idempotent</strong> operations — payments, order creation, message sends. Skip it for reads and naturally idempotent writes.</dd>
</dl>

<h2>Method idempotency at a glance</h2>
<table>
<thead>
<tr><th>Method</th><th>Idempotent?</th><th>Notes</th></tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr><td><code>GET</code></td><td>yes</td><td>Pure read.</td></tr>
<tr><td><code>PUT</code></td><td>yes</td><td>Full replace — repeated puts converge to the same state.</td></tr>
<tr><td><code>DELETE</code></td><td>yes</td><td>Return <code>204</code>, or <code>404</code> when already gone — the resource is absent either way.</td></tr>
<tr><td><code>POST</code></td><td>no</td><td>Each call can create / charge again — needs an <code>Idempotency-Key</code>.</td></tr>
<tr><td><code>PATCH</code></td><td>depends</td><td>Idempotent only if the patch doc is (e.g. "set X" yes, "increment" no).</td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<div class="box">
<span class="label">Idempotency ≠ exactly-once</span>
<p><strong>Exactly-once <em>delivery</em> is impossible</strong> in a distributed system. What you can build is exactly-once <em>effect</em>:</p>
<p class="pull">exactly-once <strong>effect</strong> = at-least-once <strong>delivery</strong> + idempotent <strong>processing</strong> (dedup)</p>
</div>

<h2>Retry strategy</h2>
<dl>
<dt>Retry only what's safe</dt>
<dd>Idempotent methods, or non-idempotent ones guarded by an <code>Idempotency-Key</code>. Never blindly retry a bare <code>POST</code>.</dd>
<dt>Exponential backoff + jitter</dt>
<dd>Spread retries over growing, randomized intervals to avoid synchronized retry storms (thundering herd).</dd>
<dt>Honor <code>Retry-After</code></dt>
<dd>When the server tells you when to come back (<code>429</code> / <code>503</code>), obey it.</dd>
<dt>Cap attempts</dt>
<dd>Bound total retries; fail fast rather than hammering a dead dependency.</dd>
<dt>Pair with circuit breakers</dt>
<dd>Stop retrying entirely once a downstream is clearly down; let it recover.</dd>
</dl>

<hr/>
<p class="src">Reference · sources: Stripe, RFC 9110 (links above).</p>
</body>
</html>
