<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Cheat sheet</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Cheat sheet — buzzword → engineering</h1>

<h2>Mental models</h2>
<ul>
<li>LLM = brain (no memory, no hands)</li>
<li>Tool = hands · Agent = brain + hands + loop + goal</li>
<li>Runtime = the app server that runs the loop &amp; enforces rules</li>
<li>Memory = what the runtime reloads (context = RAM, store = disk)</li>
<li>Workflow = you choose the path · Agent = the model chooses the path</li>
<li>MCP = USB-C / JDBC for tools (server = device, client = port)</li>
<li>Single = monolith · Multi = microservices</li>
<li>Archetype = same engine + different tools + different job</li>
</ul>

<h2>Translation table</h2>
<table>
<tr><th>Buzzword</th><th>What it actually is</th></tr>
<tr><td>Agentic / autonomous AI</td><td>An LLM in a while-loop with tools + a goal</td></tr>
<tr><td>Function calling / tools</td><td>Typed RPC the model requests, you execute</td></tr>
<tr><td>Orchestration framework</td><td>The runtime (app server for the loop)</td></tr>
<tr><td>Context window</td><td>Bounded RAM, re-sent every call</td></tr>
<tr><td>Memory / RAG</td><td>External store + a query injecting text into the prompt</td></tr>
<tr><td>Workflow / chain</td><td>A hardcoded pipeline / DAG you wrote</td></tr>
<tr><td>MCP</td><td>Standard tool interface (USB-C / JDBC); N×M → N+M</td></tr>
<tr><td>Multi-agent / swarm</td><td>Orchestrator-worker microservices for agents</td></tr>
<tr><td>Copilot / AI teammate</td><td>An archetype: the engine + one role's toolset</td></tr>
<tr><td>Hallucination</td><td>Model predicted plausible-but-wrong text</td></tr>
</table>

<h2>Three rules for the VP chair</h2>
<div class="box">
<p>① Default to <strong>workflows</strong>; agents only when the path can't be predetermined.</p>
<p>② Start <strong>single-agent</strong>; split like microservices — with evidence.</p>
<p>③ Judge any pitch by: <strong>what tools? what loop? what guardrails?</strong></p>
</div>

<h2>The ten memory rules</h2>
<ol>
<li><strong>LLM</strong> — stateless text-prediction function; brain in a jar, no memory, no hands.</li>
<li><strong>Tool</strong> — a typed function the model requests but never runs; calling = model asks, runtime does.</li>
<li><strong>Agent</strong> — LLM + tools + loop + goal; the model picks the path.</li>
<li><strong>Loop</strong> — a reconciliation loop for intent: observe, think, act, repeat.</li>
<li><strong>Runtime</strong> — the app server hosting the loop; holds state, runs tools, enforces guardrails.</li>
<li><strong>Memory</strong> — what the runtime reloads into the prompt; context is RAM, the store is disk.</li>
<li><strong>Workflow vs agent</strong> — you write the if/else vs the model writes it; choose by predictability.</li>
<li><strong>MCP</strong> — USB-C for tools; server = device, client = port, registry = catalog.</li>
<li><strong>Single vs multi</strong> — monolith vs microservices; split only when one context/role can't cope.</li>
<li><strong>Archetypes</strong> — same engine + different tools + different job description.</li>
</ol>
</body>
</html>
