<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>How to use this book</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 class="nobreak">AI Agents from First Principles</h1>
<p class="kicker">Engineering Leader's Field Guide · Visual Edition</p>
<p class="meta">Built for a Senior Lead / VP Engineering · backend &amp; distributed-systems analogies throughout</p>

<p>This is the portable edition of a single lesson: the whole agent stack, built bottom-up in
dependency order, so you can tell real capability from hype in pitches and architecture reviews —
and reconstruct it from memory months later.</p>

<div class="onesentence">
<p style="margin:0">One sentence holds the whole book. Each level unpacks one part of it:</p>
<p style="margin:0.4em 0 0"><b>An AI agent is a stateless text-prediction function</b>, wrapped in a <b>loop</b>,
given <b>tools and a goal</b>, run by <b>ordinary code</b>.</p>
</div>

<h2>Why I'm learning this (the mission)</h2>
<p>To make build-vs-buy, where-to-invest, and team-structure decisions about AI agents with durable
mental models rather than a vocabulary of buzzwords. Success = derive every layer on a whiteboard, place
any pitch on the workflow↔agent spectrum, and challenge "let's add more agents" like "let's add more
microservices."</p>

<h2>How to read it</h2>
<dl class="facts">
<dt>Each level</dt><dd>one diagram + four facts (what it <em>is</em>, why it exists, the real-world analogy, the code analogy) + a myth-vs-truth + a one-line memory rule.</dd>
<dt>Recall, don't re-read</dt><dd>the "Memory check" lines are questions first — answer from memory, then read the recall line. Reading feels like progress; recall <em>is</em> progress.</dd>
<dt>Two practice chapters</dt><dd>real use cases (your hype filter) and interview questions (use them on yourself and on candidates/vendors).</dd>
<dt>Keep the last three</dt><dd>cheat sheet, glossary, and review guides are the parts to revisit in five minutes a week.</dd>
</dl>

<p class="note">Note: this is a static reading copy. The interactive web lesson (clickable quizzes,
reveals) lives in the teaching workspace; here every answer is printed so it works on e-ink.</p>
</body>
</html>
