<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Glossary</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Glossary</h1>
<p>The canonical language for this stack. Definitions say what a thing <em>is</em>, in dependency order.</p>

<dl class="facts">
<dt>LLM</dt><dd>A stateless function: text in → predicted text out. No memory, no side effects, no hands. The brain in a jar.</dd>
<dt>Tool</dt><dd>A function the LLM may <em>request</em> — declared by a name and a JSON-schema of parameters. The hands.</dd>
<dt>Tool calling</dt><dd>The model emitting a structured request to invoke a tool, which the runtime then executes.</dd>
<dt>Agent</dt><dd>An LLM in a loop with tools and a goal, where the model decides which tools to call until the goal is met.</dd>
<dt>Agent loop</dt><dd>The control cycle: Observe → Think → Act → Repeat. A reconciliation loop for intent.</dd>
<dt>Agent runtime (harness)</dt><dd>The program that runs the loop: holds state, calls the LLM, executes tools, enforces limits. The app server.</dd>
<dt>Memory</dt><dd>Whatever the runtime puts back into the prompt. Short-term = context window; long-term = an external store it retrieves from.</dd>
<dt>Context window</dt><dd>The max text an LLM can read in one call. Working memory / RAM — bounded and re-sent each call.</dd>
<dt>Workflow</dt><dd>A system where the developer hardcodes the control flow. Predictable, cheap, testable.</dd>
<dt>Agentic workflow</dt><dd>A mostly-predefined workflow with model-decided steps embedded, or an agent fenced by guardrails.</dd>
<dt>MCP (Model Context Protocol)</dt><dd>An open standard for how agents discover and call tools/data from external systems. "USB-C for AI." Turns N×M into N+M.</dd>
<dt>MCP server</dt><dd>A process that exposes tools/data/prompts over MCP. The peripheral / device.</dd>
<dt>MCP client</dt><dd>The component in the host app that connects to MCP servers and routes tool calls. The port / driver.</dd>
<dt>Tool registry</dt><dd>The catalog of tools advertised to the model — built-ins plus everything from connected MCP servers. Service discovery for tools.</dd>
<dt>Single agent</dt><dd>One agent loop, one context, one tool registry. The monolith.</dd>
<dt>Multi-agent system</dt><dd>Several specialized agents coordinating — an orchestrator delegating to worker subagents. Microservices.</dd>
<dt>Orchestrator (lead agent)</dt><dd>The agent that plans, fans work out to subagents, and synthesizes their results. The manager / dispatcher.</dd>
<dt>Subagent (worker)</dt><dd>A specialized agent with its own context and tools, spun up by the orchestrator for a scoped subtask.</dd>
</dl>
</body>
</html>
