<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<title>Interview questions</title>
<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Interview questions on these concepts</h1>
<p>Use each one <strong>twice</strong>: answer it yourself from memory (recall), and ask it of a candidate or vendor to test depth. The answer block is a checklist of what a strong answer hits — not a script.</p>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">1</span>Walk me through exactly what happens when an agent "uses a tool".</p>
<div class="answer">The model emits a <em>structured request</em> (tool name + args); the <em>runtime</em> executes the real function; the result is fed back into the next call; the model never runs anything itself. Bonus: a tool's scope is a security boundary, like an API key.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">2</span>An LLM is stateless — so how does a chat assistant "remember" 20 turns of context?</p>
<div class="answer">The runtime re-sends the history every call; the context window is bounded RAM; durable memory is an external store (RAG); as the window fills you trim or summarise. Red-flag answer: "the model remembers."</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">3</span>When would you NOT build an agent, and ship a workflow instead?</p>
<div class="answer">When the path is known and repeatable — you buy predictability, lower cost, lower latency, and easier debugging. Default to workflows; reach for agents only when the steps can't be predetermined.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">4</span>Your agent occasionally loops forever and burns huge cost. Where do you fix it?</p>
<div class="answer">The <em>runtime</em>, not the model — max-steps, timeouts, token budgets, and guardrails are the runtime's job. Anyone who blames "the model" missed Level 5.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">5</span>Explain MCP to a skeptical exec in one analogy, and name the problem it solves.</p>
<div class="answer">"USB-C / JDBC for tools" — an open standard so any agent can reach any tool. It turns N×M bespoke integrations into N+M; a server exposes tools, a client connects. Not a Claude-only feature.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">6</span>A team wants to add a second agent to "go faster." Talk them into it — or out of it.</p>
<div class="answer">Same trade-off as premature microservices. Multi-agent costs coordination, latency, and ~15× tokens; it only helps when work is context-bound or genuinely parallel and independent. Start single-agent; split with evidence.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">7</span>How does a "coding agent" differ from a "support agent" architecturally?</p>
<div class="answer">It barely does — same engine (LLM + loop + runtime + memory). What differs is the tool registry, the system prompt, and the guardrails. Same employee, different job description.</div></div>

<div class="qa"><p class="q"><span class="qnum">8</span>Whiteboard: design a billing-dispute agent that's safe to ship.</p>
<div class="answer">Tools (look up invoice/payments, issue refund, notify); a bounded loop; guardrails — refund caps, human approval over a threshold, idempotent refunds, a full audit log, scoped permissions; per-case memory; a workflow for the common path with an agent escape-hatch for the messy ones.</div></div>
</body>
</html>
