<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en">
<head>
  <meta charset="utf-8"/>
  <title>REST API Mastery</title>
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/>
</head>
<body>
  <h1 class="nobreak">REST API Mastery</h1>
  <p class="meta">A senior / 12+ year interview-prep companion · language-agnostic</p>

  <p>Eleven short lessons, eleven interview-question banks (450+ questions with senior model answers), and five reference cheat-sheets — from <em>what REST actually is</em> to a full whiteboard design round. Built around a single goal: pass senior/staff backend interviews <strong>and</strong> genuinely master the material.</p>

  <div class="box">
    <span class="label">How to read this on Kindle</span>
    <p>The interactive web version had click-to-reveal answers. On an e-reader there are no buttons, so every question is followed by its answer below an <span class="src">ANSWER</span> divider. <strong>For real retention, answer from memory first</strong> — look away, say or think your answer, <em>then</em> read on to check. Recognising an answer is not the same as being able to produce it under pressure; the effort of recall is what makes it stick.</p>
  </div>

  <h2>How it's organised</h2>
  <dl>
    <dt>Part I — Lessons (1–11)</dt>
    <dd>The teaching. Each lesson is one tight idea with the senior "why", a diagram where it helps, a short recall quiz (with answer key), and a model interview answer to rehearse against.</dd>
    <dt>Part II — Interview question banks (1–11)</dt>
    <dd>450+ questions tagged <span class="tag t-core">Core</span> <span class="tag t-senior">Senior</span> <span class="tag t-staff">Staff</span>, grouped by sub-theme, each with a senior model answer. Part 11 is full "design X's API" rounds.</dd>
    <dt>Part III — Reference cheat-sheets</dt>
    <dd>The compressed essence — glance at these the morning of an interview.</dd>
  </dl>

  <h2>How to study</h2>
  <ul>
    <li>Read a lesson, then immediately do its quiz and rehearsal <em>from memory</em>.</li>
    <li>Work the matching question bank a day or two later — <strong>spacing</strong> beats cramming for retention.</li>
    <li>Mix banks from different lessons in one session — <strong>interleaving</strong> trains you to switch context the way a real interview does.</li>
    <li>Before an interview, re-skim the five reference sheets and the diagrams.</li>
  </ul>

  <p class="note">Sources are cited throughout (Fielding, Fowler, RFC 9110 / 9457, MDN, OWASP, OAuth, Stripe, GitHub, Google AIP) and verified at the time of writing. Diagrams are drawn in grayscale to read well on e-ink.</p>
</body>
</html>
